Order Scorpiones
You may know them as scorpions. These arachnids are predatory, and use their venomous stinger and pinchers on their front legs to help them capture prey. Their stings can be painful, but most won’t actually hurt you.

Order Pseudoscorpiones
Pseudoscorpions are tiny (almost always less than 5mm long) and are predators of insects. These arachnids do not have a stinger like the Scorpions, so they can’t sting you. Actually if you’ve found one, consider yourself lucky! They are keeping away destructive bugs like ants, carpet beetles, and mites.

Order Araneae (Spiders)
Spiders are everywhere! Although they have fangs that can inject venom, most are not aggressive. There are over 45,000 spider species, but only a few can actually hurt you. Male spiders are often smaller than the female spiders. Spiders are good neighbors to have because they eat bugs and other spiders that might try to live in your house!

Order Acari (Mites and Ticks)
Mites are usually very tiny, and, depending on the genus, may be plant eaters, predators of insects, parasites (of insects and humans). You may have heard of dust mites, which don’t feed on humans, but many people are allergic to them. Ticks tend to be larger than mites. They are all parasites and need blood to grow and reproduce. Many ticks feed on humans and other mammals, but some types of ticks feed birds, reptiles, or amphibians.

Order Orthoptera (Specifically Family Tetrigidae (Pygmy Grasshoppers))
Pygmy grasshoppers are small compared to other insects in the order Orthoptera. They are also usually colored to blend into their surroundings, so congratulations if you found one! Many Tetrigidae like to be close to the water, and some even live in it! However, there are many that like to be up in the trees too. Orthopterans are hemimetabolous, which means the young ones (called nymphs) look like the adults, but the adults have wings.

Order Strepsiptera (Specifically Adult Male Twisted-Wing Parasites)
These guys are rare, so if you found one, pat yourself on the back! Male Strepsiptera look a lot like flies, but they can’t use their mouths to feed (the mouth is vestigial). The adult males don’t live for very long- just enough to find a female and mate. Strepsiptera are parasites of other insects. Strepsiptera are holometabolous, which means the larvae don’t look anything like the adults, and there is a pupal stage between the larval and adult stages. Metamorphosis happens during the pupal stage.

Order Hemiptera (Specifically Adult Male Scale Insects)
If you’ve ever seen a scale insect, it was probably a female. The males don’t eat, and die quickly, living only long enough to mate. Since they die so fast, it is rare to find a male scale insect, so if you did, good work!

Order Ephemeroptera (Mayflies)
Young mayflies live in the water (streams mostly, but sometimes lakes), so you will usually find adult mayflies close to water. Ephemeropterans are hemimetabolous, which means the young ones (called nymphs, but technically naiads) look like the adults, but the adults have wings. Mayflies are special, though. They have one last stage as a juvenile, but it also has wings. It is called a subimago. When mayflies molt into their sexually mature adult forms, they do so in huge numbers. They also form swarms when they’re looking for mates. Fish and aquatic insects love to eat mayfly nymphs, so mayflies are considered an important part of the aquatic ecosystem. The nymphs also eat decaying things and algae in the water, so if you have a lot of mayflies, then you probably have a healthy stream!

Order Diptera (Flies)
Flies are everywhere! You are probably pretty familiar with many kinds, but maybe you just found one you thought was a wasp or a bee! Did you know that mosquitoes and midges are in the fly family? I hope you found out using the key! The halteres are one of the easiest ways to tell if you have a fly. Halteres are modified wings that give most Diptera the ability to be aerial acrobats (check out the glossary for more information on halteres). Dipterans are holometabolous, which means the larvae don’t look anything like the adults, and there is a pupal stage between the larval and adult stages. Metamorphosis happens during the pupal stage.

Order Psocoptera (Booklice and Barklice)
The insects in the Order Psocoptera are mostly scavengers. When they’re outside, they like to eat lichen and fungi, but if they get inside they might eat the paste in your book bindings or the glue that holds wallpaper to walls! This doesn’t happen very often though, compared to other types of insects that like to eat starch. Psocoptera mainly live outside. They are hemimetabolous, which means the young ones (called nymphs) look like the adults, but the adults have wings.

Order Hemiptera (Specifically Some Planthoppers and Leafhoppers)
Planthoppers and leafhoppers can look a lot alike. They both suck sap from plants, and may pass diseases to those plants. In order to figure out which one you have, you’ll have to do some more research. Check out the Resources page to find out more! Hemipterans are hemimetabolous, which means the young ones (called nymphs) look like the adults, but the adults have wings.

Order Lepidoptera (Butterflies and Moths)
All of the insects in the order Lepidoptera have scales on their wings, which are actually just flattened hairs. If you touch the wings, some of those scales might come off on your hands- it doesn’t hurt them! Although butterflies and moths look a lot alike, there are some general differences to help you guess which one you have. Remember, these aren’t always true for every Lepidopteran! Butterflies usually fly during the day, but moths tend to fly at night. When butterflies rest, they like to hold their wings up over their bodies, while moths often hold them out to the sides. Butterflies are usually very colorful, and moths are not (they’re often shades of brown and grey). Moths have a thing called a frenulum, which is a hook that keeps the front and hind wings together when they fly. Butterflies don’t have a frenulum. Lepidopterans are holometabolous, which means the larvae don’t look anything like the adults, and there is a pupal stage between the larval and adult stages. Metamorphosis happens during the pupal stage. Although you might not get to see it, a moth’s pupal case is called a cocoon, and has a cover of silk. A butterfly’s pupal case is called a chrysalis, which is hard and smooth.

Order Thysanoptera (Thrips)
Thrips have “hairy” wings, which are not very good for flying. Thrips are tiny insects, and mostly feed on plants by sucking up the sap. Thrips are considered pests because they can give diseases to the plants they feed on. However, some thrips are pollinators, and others are actually predators of other insects. Thysanoptera are hemimetabolous, which means the young ones (called nymphs) look like the adults, but the adults have wings.

Order Ephemeroptera (Mayflies)
Young mayflies live in the water (streams mostly, but sometimes lakes), so you will usually find adult mayflies close to water. Ephemeropterans are hemimetabolous, which means the young ones (called nymphs, but technically naiads) look like the adults, but the adults have wings. Mayflies are special, though. They have one last stage as a juvenile, but it also has wings. It is called a subimago. When mayflies molt into their sexually mature adult forms, they do so in huge numbers. They also form swarms when they’re looking for mates. Fish and aquatic insects love to eat mayfly nymphs, so mayflies are considered an important part of the aquatic ecosystem. The nymphs also eat decaying things and algae in the water, so if you have a lot of mayflies, then you probably have a healthy stream!

Order Trichoptera (Caddisflies)
Caddisflies have very interesting larvae (babies). They all live in freshwater, and some make a protective case for themselves. They spin it from silk and then attach small bits of their substrate to it, such as twigs, pieces of gravel, and pieces of plants or anything else they can find. Some larvae are herbivorous, while others are predators. The adults don’t usually eat anything, and only live long enough to mate. The caddisfly adults can easily be mistaken for moths. If you have lots of caddisflies, you probably have healthy bodies of water! Trichopterans are holometabolous, which means the larvae don’t look anything like the adults, and there is a pupal stage between the larval and adult stages.

Order Hymenoptera (Sawflies, Ants, Wasps, Bees, Ichneumonids, Chalcidoids)
The order Hymenoptera is HUGE! There are over 150,000 species in this order. Did you know that ants are related to bumble bees? There are so many different genera, in fact, that it would be impossible to tell you about them all here. So check out the Resources page for more information! Hymenoptera are holometabolous, which means the larvae don’t look anything like the adults, and there is a pupal stage between the larval and adult stages.

Order Neuroptera (Fishflies, Dobsonflies, Lacewings, and Antlions)
You may have noticed that your Neuropteran has big eyes! These are their compound eyes, and make them great at finding food. Most of the larvae (babies) of this order are predators. The ones that are like to camouflage themselves in debris, or, in the case of antlions, dig pits! On the other hand, only some of the adult neuropterans are predators. Some don’t eat at all, and others drink nectar. Because they can be predatory, insects in the group Neuroptera are our friends! Neuropterans are holometabolous, which means the larvae don’t look anything like the adults, and there is a pupal stage between the larval and adult stages.

Order Mecoptera (Scorpionflies)
Some scorpionflies look like they have a stinger, but it’s actually the male genitals! The abdomens of female scorpionflies just taper at the end. The big beaks of scorpionflies are usually used for scavenging; they eat dying plants and dead insects. Mecopterans usually like to live in moist areas with lots of decaying leaf litter, like forests. Eggs need a lot of moisture to hatch, and when they do, the larvae look like caterpillars. Mecopterans are holometabolous, which means the larvae don’t look anything like the adults, and there is a pupal stage between the larval and adult stages.

Order Odonata (Dragonflies and Damselflies)
Dragonflies and damselflies look a lot alike. They both have very large compound eyes, which help them to be great hunters, able to capture prey in flight. This is good, because Odonata are predators as juveniles and adults! However, they are different in a lot of ways too, so it shouldn’t be too hard to tell which one you have. Damselflies look a lot more delicate than dragonflies. The big eyes of the dragonfly basically touch at the back of the face, but there is a gap between them on damselflies. Damselflies hold their wings back at rest, while dragonflies hold them out to the sides. Congratulations if you caught one- they’re good fliers! Odonatans are hemimetabolous, which means the young ones (called nymphs, but technically naiads) look like the adults, but the adults have wings.

Order Hemiptera
Did you know that all bugs are insects, but not all insects are bugs? That’s because the order Hemiptera contains the “true” bugs! But don’t be fooled: just because an insect has “bug” in its name, doesn’t mean it’s a hemipteran. Ladybugs, for example, are beetles. All hemipterans have “piercing-sucking” mouthparts. Mostly they use these mouthparts on plants, but there are some predators, and even some blood-feeders (bedbugs and kissing bugs). Many insects in this order are considered pests of plants. Hemipterans are hemimetabolous, which means the young ones (called nymphs) look like the adults, but the adults have wings. There are at least 50,000 species in this order, so you may have to do more research to find out which bug you have. Check the Resources page next!

Order Isoptera (Termites)
You can easily tell the difference between a termite and an ant, because termites don’t have a constricted waist (see Hymenoptera). Termites are “eusocial” insects, and live in large colonies. The term eusocial means that the castes (workers, soldiers, kings, and queens) all look different, even if they’re the same species. It also means that they take care of their young, and defend their colonies (among other things!). Termites eat cellulose, so that means that they often eat wood, but it can also be other types of plant material. Termites are actually very important for ecosystems, even though they are considered pests when they’re in our houses. Some termites make nests, and some live underground in mounds. But they’ll always be found in warm areas, because they are considered “soft” bodied, which means they freeze easily. Isoptera are hemimetabolous, which means the young ones (called nymphs) look like the adults, but the adults have wings. Development is complicated in this order, though, due to the different castes.

Order Plecoptera (Stoneflies)
The nymphs of stoneflies are aquatic, so the adults are usually found near the water. Despite their many-veined wings, they are not very good fliers. Adults may not be able to eat, but the ones that do only eat plants. The adults only live for a few weeks, but the nymphs can live for up to 4 years! Stonefly nymphs need water with a lot of oxygen in it, so if you found one, congratulations! You have a very healthy body of water near you! Plecopterans are hemimetabolous, which means the young ones (called nymphs, but technically naiads) look like the adults, but the adults have wings.

Order Embiidina (Webspinners)
Webspinners use the silk they spin to make “galleries” that they live in. In their galleries they are protected from predators among other things. A gallery usually has more than just one webspinner in it. The females lay their eggs in the gallery, and take care of them for a little while after they hatch. Webspinners eat plants, except for the adult males, which don’t eat at all. The males die quickly, so they leave the gallery as soon as they can to find a mate. If you’ve found a webspinner, good job! They are pretty rare. Webspinners are hemimetabolous, which means the young ones (called nymphs) look like the adults, but the adults have wings.

Order Zoraptera (Angel Insects)
These little guys are very rare, so if you found one, congratulations! There are only 44 species that we know of, in one genus: Zorotypus. Zorapterans live in colonies in or under rotting wood, and mainly eat fungal spores and dead plant material. Sometimes they are hunters of other tiny insects and mites.

Order Psocoptera (Psocids; Booklice and Barklice)
The insects in the Order Psocoptera are mostly scavengers. When they’re outside, they like to eat lichen and fungi, but if they get inside they might eat the paste in your book bindings or the glue that holds wallpaper to walls! This doesn’t happen very often though, compared to other types of insects that like to eat starch. Psocoptera mainly live outside. Psocopterans are hemimetabolous, which means the young ones (called nymphs) look like the adults, but the adults have wings.

Order Hemiptera
Did you know that all bugs are insects, but not all insects are bugs? That’s because the order Hemiptera contains the “true” bugs! But don’t be fooled: just because an insect has “bug” in its name, doesn’t mean it’s a hemipteran. Ladybugs, for example, are beetles. All hemipterans have “piercing-sucking” mouthparts. Mostly they use these mouthparts on plants, but there are some predators, and even some blood-feeders (bedbugs and kissing bugs). Many insects in this order are considered pests of plants. Hemipterans are hemimetabolous, which means the young ones (called nymphs) look like the adults, but the adults have wings. There are at least 50,000 species in this order, so you may have to do more research to find out which bug you have. Check the Resources page next!

Order Dermaptera (Earwigs)
Most earwigs have the easily recognizable forceps-like pincers called cerci. The pincers of males tend to be more curved, but both males and females can use their pincers for tasks such as grabbing things and defense. Earwigs have membranous hindwings that are thin, and have to be folded to fit under their forewings, which are short and leathery. The earwigs use their pincers to help fold up the wings! Most earwigs can fly with their hindwings, but it doesn’t happen very often (at least when a human is watching!). Earwigs are mostly omnivorous scavengers, but some are predators. They move around mostly at night, and are considered pests by most people because they include garden plants in their diets. Earwigs are good at hiding under things since they are flattened, so during the day they squeeze into tight spaces. Dermapterans are hemimetabolous, which means the young ones (called nymphs) look like the adults, but the adults have wings. Earwigs are just as likely to crawl in your ear as any other insect (which is highly unlikely), so don’t worry!

Order Coleoptera (Beetles)
The order Coleoptera is the largest of all the insect orders! There are so many different types of beetles that it is impossible to describe them here. They range from living in water to on land, from eating dung to rotting flesh to being serious plant pests. They can be all colors of the rainbow and live in almost all the places in the world. They can be tiny to gigantic, and they have a wide range of mandible types including horns and pincers. Coleopterans are holometabolous, which means the larvae don’t look anything like the adults, and there is a pupal stage between the larval and adult stages. I highly recommend that you research your beetle to find out exactly what it is! Check the Resources page to start!

Order Orthoptera (Grasshoppers, Katydids, and Crickets)
All insects in the order Orthoptera use song to attract mates. Usually it’s only the males that “sing,” but in the Katydid (or bush cricket) family, females sing too. Although you may think of the jumping insects when you think of crickets, mole crickets are also orthopterans. Mole crickets have front legs that are adapted for digging, and live underground. When they sing, they do it from a burrow that opens out like a horn, so it’s very loud! Orthopterans are hemimetabolous, which means the young ones (called nymphs) look like the adults, but the adults have wings. If you caught a grasshopper or cricket, congratulations! They’re good jumpers and can be hard to sneak up on!

Order Mantodea (Mantids)
You may know mantids by the name “Praying Mantis.” They’re called this because of their front legs, which are modified for grabbing prey and called “raptorial.” Mantids are predators, and are very good at it. Mantids have large compound eyes, and their necks can rotate almost 180 degrees. When hunting, most stand very still and may even camouflage themselves. When their prey walks by they attack very quickly! Some mantids will stalk their prey. Mantids eat other insects and arthropods, but the bigger mantids may go after birds and lizards. A lot of species of mantids have built-in camouflage, called “cryptic coloring.” Others actually mimic the look of flowers. A mantid’s wings are usually brightly colored, so if a mantid is threatened, it will hold up its arms and spread its wings to try to scare away whatever is threatening it. Mantids can use their wings to fly too! Mantids are hemimetabolous, which means the young ones (called nymphs) look like the adults, but the adults have wings.

Order Blattodea (Cockroaches)
If you found a cockroach in your house, chances are you were grossed out! But don’t let their bad reputation keep you from learning and appreciating this order. The cockroaches that may live in our houses only represent a fraction of all of the Blattodea species. Most cockroaches are pretty small, but in Central and South America they may get big living in the tropics. The forewings of cockroaches are called tegmina, and are leathery, but not necessarily hard. Cockroaches eat just about anything with their chewing mouthparts. Many cockroaches live on land, but some are aquatic. Regardless of wet or dry, cockroaches live on every continent (even Antarctica!). Cockroaches are hemimetabolous, which means the young ones (called nymphs) look like the adults, but the adults have wings.

Order Diptera (Rare Wingless Flies)
These flies are true flies, but lack wings. If you found one, save it! They are very rare.

Order Protura
Insects of this order are very rare, mostly because they are so small that they’re hardly ever seen! They live in moist places, and probably eat decaying plant matter and tiny dead arthropods. Not much is known about Proturans. They don’t have eyes or antennae, so their feet are what they use to sense their environment. They are sometimes called coneheads because of the shape of their heads. Congratulations if you found one!

Order Siphonaptera (Fleas)
Fleas are great jumpers. Their long legs are capable of propelling them up to 7 inches in the air, or 13 inches along the ground. And they are tiny, so that’s a big jump! Fleas are flattened “laterally” so if you look at them from the top, they’re very skinny. This makes it easy for them to move through hair and feathers. Fleas are parasites of mammals and other warm-blooded creatures such as birds. Most fleas have a very specific host, but some aren’t very choosy. Fleas are capable of giving diseases to the things they bite, and some people are very allergic to them. So if you see a flea, try not to touch it, and let someone know. Fleas are holometabolous, which means the larvae don’t look anything like the adults, and there is a pupal stage between the larval and adult stages.

Order Diptera (Rare; Potentially Family Hippoboscidae)
These flies are parasites of mammals and other warm-blooded animals like birds. They are not very good fliers, and are nicknamed louse flies. They are rare, but watch out. They are capable of giving diseases to the animals they bite. Congratulations if you found this rare insect, but let someone know! Diptera are holometabolous, which means the larvae don’t look anything like the adults, and there is a pupal stage between the larval and adult stages.

Order Hemiptera (Specifically Bed Bugs and Bat Bugs)
Bed bugs are not great to have around because they feed on human blood using their piercing-sucking mouthparts. Luckily, we’re pretty sure that bed bugs don’t give diseases to humans, but many people are allergic to them. Bat bugs look a lot like bed bugs, but mostly eat the blood of bats. They will bite humans if they get the chance, though. If you’ve found one of these little guys, let someone know! You definitely don’t want them in your house. Bed and bat bugs are hemimetabolous, which means the young ones (called nymphs) look like the adults, but the adults have wings.

Order Phthiraptera (Lice)
Lice are amazing creatures despite being parasites of birds and mammals. This is because their bodies are perfectly specialized for the animal they feed on. Some lice chew on things like dead skin or other body debris, while others will pierce the skin and suck blood and other fluids. While lice are able to give diseases to their hosts, they are not a sign of a dirty person or structure. Lice are good at hanging on tight to whatever structure they’re adapted for (feathers or hairs), so you can be as clean as you want, and still have them. So don’t worry, but let someone know if you found one! Lice are hemimetabolous, which means the young ones (called nymphs) look like the adults, but the adults have wings.

Order Lepidoptera (Specifically Wingless Moths)
Wingless moths are not all wingless- just the females are. So, if you found a wingless moth, it may not be too hard to figure out its genus and species. Check the Resources page for your next step! Moths are holometabolous, which means the larvae don’t look anything like the adults, and there is a pupal stage between the larval and adult stages.

Diptera (Rare Types; Potentially Genus Aptilotus)
These wingless flies are very rare, and probably eat dung. They’re usually pretty small, and are helpful parts of the environment because they recycle fecal waste! Dipterans are holometabolous, which means the larvae don’t look anything like the adults, and there is a pupal stage between the larval and adult stages. Congratulations if you found one!

Order Thysanoptera (Thrips)
Thrips have “hairy” wings, which are not very good for flying. Thrips are tiny insects, and mostly feed on plants by sucking up the sap. Thrips are considered pests because they can give diseases to the plants they feed on. However, some thrips are pollinators, and others are actually predators of other insects. Thysanoptera are hemimetabolous, which means the young ones (called nymphs) look like the adults, but the adults have wings.

Order Hemiptera (Specifically Aphids)
Aphids eat plant sap using their piercing-sucking mouthparts. They are capable of passing diseases to plants, so humans consider them pests. Plants do okay with some aphids on them, but if there’s too many, it can hurt the plant. Aphids get eaten by lots of other insects, but may be “farmed” by ants because they secrete something called “honeydew,” which is as sweet as it sounds to ants. Aphids are hemimetabolous, which means the young ones (called nymphs) look like the adults, but the adults have wings. If you want to keep your aphids for a collection, store them in alcohol. If they dry up, they won’t look like aphids anymore! Check the Equipment page for more information on collecting insects.

Order Hymenoptera (Ants and Wingless Wasps)
There are a lot of different kinds of ants, but some are pretty easy to identify to family or even genus and species if you have something to magnify them. Only some ants are considered pests to humans, and that’s usually because they like to get in our houses and eat our food. Some species of ants may have small colonies, but other species live in huge colonies, with millions of ants in them. Ants are usually “eusocial,” which means that the castes (workers, soldiers, drones, and queens) all look different, even if they’re the same species. It also means that they take care of their young, and defend their colonies (among other things!). Did you know there were wingless wasps? They are easy to mistake for ants, so look closely at the antennae. Wasps don’t have elbowed antennae, but they still sting, so look out! Most wingless wasps are not aggressive, though, and will only sting if they are being crushed. Hymenoptera are holometabolous, which means the larvae don’t look anything like the adults, and there is a pupal stage between the larval and adult stages.

Order Microcoryphia (Bristletails)
Bristletails live in a lot of different places. They tend to like moist places best, but can be found in deserts sometimes too. They eat algae and other organic matter. Bristletails can jump high for their size: up to 12 inches! They’re hard to catch, so if you got one, good job! Bristletails are ametabolous, which means they just eventually molt into the adult stage, and the adults molt too.

Order Thysanura (Silverfish and Firebrats)
Silverfish and firebrats look a lot alike. However, silverfish are usually a solid light grey, while firebrats tend to have mottled colors. Both of these insects like warm and moist places, and eat starchy and protein-rich foods. For these reasons, humans consider them pests when they are in our homes. Thysanurans are ametabolous, which means they just eventually molt into the adult stage, and the adults molt too.

Order Odonata (Specifically Nymphs; Dragonflies and Damselflies)
The nymphs (technically naiads) of the order Odonata are fierce predators. They live in water, but breathe oxygen, so they have gills. They eat aquatic arthropods and may even eat small fish! Once they go through their nymphal stages, their last molt is the adult form, which is a great flier and also a predator.

Order Ephemeroptera (Specifically Nymphs; Mayflies)
Nymphs of this order (technically naiads) use gills to breathe when the water they live in doesn’t have a lot of oxygen, but if there is enough oxygen, they may absorb it through their skin. Mayfly nymphs molt many times before becoming subimagos (winged juveniles) and then adults. They can live for over a year in nymphal stages. The nymphs of most species are herbivores, eating algae and other plants in the water, but some species are predators of small aquatic arthropods and their larvae.

Order Plecoptera (Specifically Nymphs; Stoneflies)
Nymphs of this order (technically naiads) use gills to breathe when the water they live in doesn’t have a lot of oxygen, but if there is enough oxygen, they may absorb it through their skin. Stonefly nymphs need very clean water to live. Stoneflies can live as nymphs for over a year before molting to the adult stage. The nymphs of most species eat plants matter, but some are carnivorous and will eat small aquatic arthropods.

Order Lepidoptera (Rare; Aquatic Caterpillars, Potentially Family Crambidae)
Wow, if you found one of these, you are lucky! They are the rare aquatic caterpillars of a terrestrial moth. Like many other caterpillars, these ones are herbivores, but unlike most other caterpillars, since they live in the water they have gills to help them breathe.

Order Neuroptera (Specifically Larvae of Sisyridae)
These aquatic larvae are very specialized. They parasitize freshwater sponges by piercing them with their long mouthparts and sucking out the contents of their cells. They also use their antennae to help them move around, and they have gills for breathing. When they are ready to pupate, the larvae leave the water and make a cocoon.

Order Neuroptera (Specifically Larvae; Fishflies and Alderflies)
Fishfly larvae may be predators or omnivores. They have very strong mandibles, which they can use to pinch you, so be careful when you handle them! Fishflies use gills to breathe underwater, but may also absorb oxygen through their skin. Fishflies pupate on land. Alderfly larvae can also pinch you with their strong mandibles, so look out! These larvae are predators, and also use gills to breathe, like the fishfly larvae.

Order Trichoptera (Specifically Larvae; Caddisflies)
Most species of caddisfly larvae make themselves cases to live in. They spin silk, and weave parts of their environment (the bottom of bodies of water) into it. It is strong, and keeps them safe. Some species of larvae also use their silk to make nets that they use to collect food from the water, which they then eat. Others walk around and collect their food. Different species eat different things depending on the water they live in. They can be herbivores or predators. To pupate, the caddisflies that build cases just close off the top of the case while underwater. When the adult emerges it swims to the surface and spends the rest of its (short) life on land and in the air.

Order Coleoptera (Specifically Aquatic Larvae; Beetles)
The aquatic coleopteran larvae are just as diverse as the terrestrial ones. There aren’t many defining features, so it might be easier to know if you don’t have the larvae of an aquatic beetle. However, if you want to be sure, check out the Resources page to keep searching!

Order Diplura (rare)
These insects are rare mostly because they’re so small! They live in damp leaf litter, and moist soil, so they can be hard to find. Some species have the long cerci, like in the picture, and are plant eaters. Others have cerci that are forcepslike, and they are usually predators. Some species are omnivorous. Diplurans are ametabolous, which means they just eventually molt into the adult stage.

Order Collembola (Springtails)
Springtails get their name because they have a “furcula,” which is usually folded under the boy and snaps against a surface to make them “jump” when they’re threatened. Some springtails are longer and skinnier (like the picture), while others are much more round, like a ball. Most species of springtails breathe through their skin, instead of through trachea like other insects. Because of the way they breathe, springtails can dry out quickly, so they usually live in moist places. Springtails eat tiny things like mold spores and pollen grains, but will potentially eat just about anything, including bacteria. Mostly they are good for the ecosystem, but some humans consider them pests because they can eat food crops. These insects are very small, so they are easy to miss, but there are many of them out there. Springtails are ametabolous, which means they just eventually molt into the adult stage.

Order Coleoptera (Specifically Larviform Beetles)
There are a few genera of beetles where the adult female looks like a larva. Fireflies contain some of them. Sometimes the only visible difference between the actual larva and the adult female is that the adult female has compound eyes. Coleoptera are holometabolous, which means the larvae don’t usually look anything like the adults, and there is a pupal stage between the larval and adult stages. In this case the larvae might look like the adults, but there is still a pupal stage.

Order Mecoptera (Specifically Wingless Scorpionflies; Rare)
The wingless scorpionfly is also called a wingless hanging fly. It is rare, but most likely to be found in central California in late spring.

Order Strepsiptera (Specifically Some Female Twisted-Wing Parasites; Rare)
These rare insects are only found in Texas.

Order Phasmatodea (Phasmids)
Insects in the order Phasmatodea look a lot like sticks, which is why they are also sometimes called walking sticks. However, there is a family in this order that mimics leaves too! This stick or leaf mimicry is excellent camouflage against predators, and some of the insects have extra outgrowths that make them even more convincing as plants. In addition to their natural camouflage, phasmids may have spines on their legs to harm predators, glands that release chemicals to drive predators away or hurt them if it gets in the predators’ mouths, or brightly colored wings to startle predators. Phasmids themselves are herbivores, and some are considered pests because they eat leaves and can damage trees. Not all of the Phasmids can fly, which isn’t surprising because some of them can get up to almost 2 feet long. They are nocturnal and use their compound eyes for seeing well with very little light. Phasmids are hemimetabolous, which means the young ones (called nymphs) look like the adults, but the adults have wings.

Order Mantophasmatodea (Mantophasmids)
Mantophasmids are very rare, and found only in Africa. They are hemimetabolous, which means the young ones (called nymphs) look like the adults. In other orders, the adults will have wings, but the Mantophasmids don’t. Mantophasmids are nocturnal, and are ambush hunters, and eat other arthropods, including spiders.

Order Blattodea (Cockroaches)
If you found a cockroach in your house, chances are you were grossed out! But don’t let their bad reputation keep you from learning and appreciating this order. The cockroaches that may live in our houses only represent a fraction of all of the Blattodea species. Most cockroaches are pretty small, but in Central and South America they may get big living in the tropics. The forewings of cockroaches are called tegmina, and are leathery, but not necessarily hard. Cockroaches eat just about anything with their chewing mouthparts. Many cockroaches live on land, but some are aquatic. Regardless of wet or dry, cockroaches live on every continent (even Antarctica!). Cockroaches are hemimetabolous, which means the young ones (called nymphs) look like the adults, but the adults have wings.

Order Grylloblattodea (Ice Crawlers; Rare)
Ice crawlers live exactly where their name says: in the ice: they can be found on mountaintops and the edges of glaciers. Ice crawlers are omnivorous, eating just about anything they can find- even dead animals. They are nocturnal, and are usually present in leaf litter or under rocks. Ice crawlers are hemimetabolous, which means the young ones (called nymphs) look like the adults. Most adult hemimetabolous insects have wings, but ice crawlers do not.

Order Phasmatodea (Phasmids; Specifically Genus Timema)
Phasmatodea are also called walking sticks. Walking sticks are usually long and slender, but the ones in the genus Timema are stouter. Due to their forcepslike cerci, they almost look like earwigs. Like other Phasmids, Timema are nocturnal herbivores. Unlike other Phasmids, they have 3 tarsal segments vs. the normal 5. Timema have so far only been found on the west coast of North America, in California mostly. If you found a Timema phasmid, that’s awesome!

Order Dermaptera (Earwigs)
Most earwigs have the easily recognizable forceps-like pincers called cerci. The pincers of males tend to be more curved, but both males and females can use their pincers for tasks such as grabbing things and defense. Earwigs have membranous hindwings that are thin, and have to be folded to fit under their forewings, which are short and leathery. The earwigs use their pincers to help fold up the wings! Most earwigs can fly with their hindwings, but it doesn’t happen very often (at least when a human is watching!). Earwigs are mostly omnivorous scavengers, but some are predators. They move around mostly at night, and are considered pests by most people because they include garden plants in their diets. Earwigs are good at hiding under things since they are flattened, so during the day they squeeze into tight spaces. Dermapterans are hemimetabolous, which means the young ones (called nymphs) look like the adults, but the adults have wings. Earwigs are just as likely to crawl in your ear as any other insect (which is highly unlikely), so don’t worry!

Order Embiidina (Webspinners)
Webspinners use the silk they spin to make “galleries” that they live in. In their galleries they are protected from predators among other things. A gallery usually has more than just one webspinner in it. The females lay their eggs in the gallery, and take care of them for a little while after they hatch. Webspinners eat plants, except for the adult males, which don’t eat at all. The males die quickly, so they leave the gallery as soon as they can to find a mate. If you’ve found a webspinner, good job! They are pretty rare. Webspinners are hemimetabolous, which means the young ones (called nymphs) look like the adults, but the adults have wings.

Order Orthoptera (Grasshoppers, Katydids, and Crickets)
All insects in the order Orthoptera use song to attract mates. Usually it’s only the males that “sing,” but in the Katydid (or bush cricket) family, females sing too. Although you may think of the jumping insects when you think of crickets, mole crickets are also orthopterans. Mole crickets have front legs that are adapted for digging, and live underground. When they sing, they do it from a burrow that opens out like a horn, so it’s very loud! Orthopterans are hemimetabolous, which means the young ones (called nymphs) look like the adults, but the adults have wings. If you caught a grasshopper or cricket, congratulations! They’re good jumpers and can be hard to sneak up on!

Order Isoptera (Termites)
You can easily tell the difference between a termite and an ant, because termites don’t have a constricted waist (see Hymenoptera). Termites are “eusocial” insects, and live in large colonies. The term eusocial means that the castes (workers, soldiers, kings, and queens) all look different, even if they’re the same species. It also means that they take care of their young, and defend their colonies (among other things!). Termites eat cellulose, so that means that they often eat wood, but it can also be other types of plant material. Termites are actually very important for ecosystems, even though they are considered pests when they’re in our houses. Some termites make nests, and some live underground in mounds. But they’ll always be found in warm areas, because they are considered “soft” bodied, which means they freeze easily. Isoptera are hemimetabolous, which means the young ones (called nymphs) look like the adults, but the adults have wings. Development is complicated in this order, though, due to the different castes.

Order Zoraptera (Angel Insects)
These little guys are very rare, so if you found one, congratulations! There are only 44 species that we know of, in one genus: Zorotypus. Zorapterans live in colonies in or under rotting wood, and mainly eat fungal spores and dead plant material. Sometimes they are hunters of other tiny insects and mites.

Order Psocoptera (Booklice and Barklice)
The insects in the Order Psocoptera are mostly scavengers. When they’re outside, they like to eat lichen and fungi, but if they get inside they might eat the paste in your book bindings or the glue that holds wallpaper to walls! This doesn’t happen very often though, compared to other types of insects that like to eat starch. Psocoptera mainly live outside. They are hemimetabolous, which means the young ones (called nymphs) look like the adults, but the adults have wings.

Order Lepidoptera (Specifically Caterpillars/Larvae of Moths and Butterflies)
The larvae of insects in the order Lepidoptera are commonly called caterpillars. Be careful, though, because the larvae of some other insects (such as sawflies) are also called caterpillars. Almost all of the Lepidopteran larvae are herbivores. Some may feed on animal products though, such as wool. Many lepidopteran larvae are considered pests, not only because of what they eat, but because they eat a lot! Lepidopteran larvae have soft bodies, and come in many shapes and sizes. Some are brightly colored or have ornamentations (like spines) to warn predators away from them. Others are dull colored or may be mottled to blend in with their environment. Most of the time the butterfly or moth that comes from a caterpillar looks completely different than the coloring would suggest. Although some larvae are very distinctive and can be associated with their adult form, others are not. So if you found a caterpillar that’s a moth or butterfly larvae, you should hang onto it until it turns into an adult to see what you get!

Order Mecoptera (Specifically Scorpionfly Larvae)
Larvae of scorpionflies like moisture! You’ll probably see them when it’s been damp. Most of the larvae are omnivorous and will eat plants and dead insects, but some are predators. These larvae have compound eyes, which is unusual for larval stages of insects. Other than that, though, they may look a lot like the caterpillar of a moth or butterfly.

Order Hymenoptera (Specifically Sawfly Larvae)
Sawfly larvae are easy to mistake for butterfly or moth larvae if you don’t know what you’re looking for. They like to eat plants and tend to eat in groups, which is why many humans consider them pests. Like the lepidopteran larvae, they can eat a lot of food, and may destroy the plant they’re feeding on.

Order Neuroptera (Specifically Larvae of Antlions and Lacewings)
Larvae of antlions and lacewings are predators. Their specialized jaws are able to suck the juices out of their prey. Antlions actually inject venom into their prey, which paralyzes and digests the inside of it before it is sucked out. Antlion larvae build pit traps for its prey. When the prey walks by it often falls into the pit and the waiting jaws of the antlion. Antlions don’t move around very well outside of their pits, and have the nickname “doodlebug” because of the meandering paths they take.

Order Coleoptera (Specifically Larvae; Beetles)
The coleopteran larvae are just as diverse as the adults. Beyond a few easily recognizable larvae (like white grubs and lady beetles), there aren’t many defining features that will tell you what kind of beetle your larva will turn into. Take note of its habitat and the time of year you found it, and then check out the Resources page to keep looking!

Order Neuroptera (Specifically Snakefly Larvae)
The heads of snakefly larvae look a lot like the heads of the adults. The rest of the body is very squishy, though. These larvae are predatory, but they aren’t very strong, so they mostly eat very small arthropods (mites and barklice) or arthropod eggs.

Order Coleoptera (Specifically Larvae of the Suborder Adephaga)
Adephaga is a large suborder, containing at least 11 families of ground and water beetles. Many of the larvae and adult beetles in this suborder are predators. Because of the size of this suborder, it may be difficult to figure out which beetle you found, especially if it’s just the larvae. Take note of its surroundings and the time of year, and go to the Resources page to keep looking!

Order Mecoptera (Specifically Larvae of the Family Boreidae)
Insects in the family Boreidae are called snow scorpionflies. They are wingless (or have reduced wings that look like bristles), and live in the snow, as their name implies, and are most active during the winter and early spring months. Snow scorpionflies look a lot like other scorpionflies, but they aren’t usually as brightly colored. These insects are rare, so if you found one, congratulations!

Order Coleoptera (Specifically Larvae; Beetles)
The coleopteran larvae are just as diverse as the adults. Beyond a few easily recognizable larvae (like white grubs or lady beetles), there aren’t many defining features that will tell you what kind of beetle your larva will turn into. Take note of its habitat and the time of year you found it, and then check out the Resources page to keep looking!

Order Coleoptera or Strepsiptera (Specifically Triungulin Larvae)
Triungulin larvae get the name from their 3 tarsal claws. They are special in another way, though, and are very rare. These larvae are parasites, and they are able to move around very well to find their hosts, which will usually be bees. Triungulin larvae of the blister beetle, for example, will either be carried by an adult, or crawl on its own to the nest of a bee and eat the bee larvae and the food in its cell. The larvae will then molt to a grub that looks more typical of beetle larvae.

Order Diptera (Specifically Aquatic Larvae of Flies)
There are several families of Diptera that have aquatic larvae, such as crane flies and mosquitoes. Most aquatic larvae are very similar, so put yours in a jar with some water and check out the Resources page to see if you can learn more about it!

Order Hemiptera (Specifically Female Scale Insects)
Female scale insects are covered by… you guessed it: a scale! The scale is just a protective covering for the insect underneath, though. You might not even know there’s an insect under there if you don’t look. Female scale insects live under their scale for their whole live. When a female egg hatches, the larva can move around. It makes its way to a good spot on a plant, then molts, losing its legs. Since the males have legs and wings, when it’s time to mate, they find the female.

Order Strepsiptera (Specifically Female Twisted-Wing Parasites)
Female Strepsiptera are parasites of other insects. You can actually see their head sticking out from an insect’s cuticle (usually between segments). After a female egg hatches, the larva is triungulin, and finds its way to a host. It secretes enzymes to soften the host’s cuticle, then molts into its immobile form inside the host. Male twisted-wing parasites can fly to a female, and inseminate her at a place between her head and thorax. The female develops the eggs in her body, and that is where they hatch too.

Order Siphonaptera (Specifically Larvae; Fleas)
Flea larvae live on the ground, which is where their eggs usually hatch, but they like the dark, and will hide if possible. They’ll eat just about any organic matter they can find, like skin cells, other flea eggs, and the “flea dirt” (feces) from adult fleas. Fleas feed on mammals, so if you find a flea larva, let someone know!

Order Lepidoptera (Specifically Moth Larvae)
The larvae of moths are called caterpillars. Be careful, though, because the larvae of some other insects (such as sawflies) are also called caterpillars. It is hard to tell the difference between moth and butterfly caterpillars, unless you see their pupal case. A moth’s pupal case is called a “cocoon.” However, the caterpillar you just found may already live in its case if it’s a bagworm. Since the caterpillar you found has well-developed mandibles, it’s great at eating leaves and fruit, and may be considered a pest if there’s too many of them!

Order Coleoptera (Specifically Larvae; Beetles)
The coleopteran larvae are just as diverse as the adults. Beyond a few easily recognizable larvae (like white grubs or lady beetles), there aren’t many defining features that will tell you what kind of beetle your larva will turn into. Take note of its habitat and the time of year you found it, and then check out the Resources page to keep looking!

Order Diptera (Specifically Larvae; Flies)
Larvae of many flies are called maggots. Fly maggots tend to eat dead things and dung, and use their mouth hooks to help. If you think that’s gross, it might help to remember that if they didn’t eat it, it would still be around! Maggots are very important parts of our ecosystem, and help by cleaning it up.

Order Coleoptera (Specifically White Grubs; Beetle Larvae)
White grubs are beetle larvae. These have a characteristic “C” shape, and are found underground. There are many beetles that have larvae that look like white grubs, though, so you may not know which Beetle it’s going to turn into, although it will probably be in the family Scarabaeidae. Pay close attention to when you found it (the month or season), where you found it (in a lawn or in dung), and if there are adults around to give you clues. Then check out the Resources page to do more research!

Order Lepidoptera (Specifically Caterpillars/Larvae of Moths)
The larvae of insects in the order Lepidoptera are commonly called caterpillars. Be careful, though, because the larvae of some other insects (such as sawflies) are also called caterpillars. It is hard to tell the difference between moth and butterfly caterpillars, unless you see their pupal case. A moth produces a “cocoon,” which is often covered in silk and looks soft. A butterfly produces a “chrysalis,” which looks hard and might be shiny. Almost all of the Lepidopteran larvae are herbivores. Some may feed on animal products though, such as wool. Many lepidopteran larvae are considered pests, not only because of what they eat, but because they eat a lot! Lepidopteran larvae have soft bodies, and come in many shapes and sizes. Some are brightly colored or have ornamentations (like spines) to warn predators away from them. Others are dull colored or may be mottled to blend in with their environment. Most of the time the butterfly or moth that comes from a caterpillar looks completely different than the coloring would suggest. Although some larvae are very distinctive and can be associated with their adult form, others are not. So if you found a caterpillar that’s a moth or butterfly larvae, you should hang onto it until it turns into an adult to see what you get!

Order Hymenoptera (Specifically Larvae of the Suborder Apocrita)
Insects in the suborder Apocrita include ants, bees, and wasps. There are lots of different families in this suborder, so you’ll probably need to do more research to figure out which bug you have. Looking at its surroundings will help, though. Does it live underground? In a nest with cells? Is the nest attached to a house or a tree? What other insects are around it? If you found the larvae of one of these insects, you’ll probably find adults nearby, since the larvae require the adults help to grow. See if you can catch an adult and use the Resources page to figure out what it is!

Order Diptera (Specifically Larvae, Probably Suborder Nematocera)
The suborder Nematocera contains insects such as mosquitoes, gnats, black flies, and crane flies, to name a few. Mosquitoes, some gnats, and black flies bite humans, but crane flies do not. Most of these insects have aquatic larvae, but some are semi-aquatic or terrestrial. The brushlike mandibles of the larva you might be looking at help it to filter food out of its environment.

Order Coleoptera (Specifically Larvae; Beetles)
The coleopteran larvae are just as diverse as the adults. Beyond a few easily recognizable larvae (like white grubs and lady beetles), there aren’t many defining features that will tell you what kind of beetle your larva will turn into. Take note of its habitat and the time of year you found it, and then check out the Resources page to keep looking!

Order Diptera (Specifically Larvae of the Family Cecidomyiidae)
Insects in the family Cecidomyiidae are commonly called gall midges. These tiny insects have hairy wings when they’re adults, and look a lot like mosquitoes up close. Gall midges lay their eggs in plants, and as the larvae feed it creates the gall. If you see a gall midge larva with the “breast bone” that’s shown in the picture, it is in its last stage before pupation. Gall midges can be brightly colored too (pink, orange, red, yellow), not just white like the one in the picture.

Order Diptera (Specifically Maggots/Larvae of the Infraorder Muscomorpha)
Maggots of muscomorphid flies tend to eat dead things and dung, and use their mouth hooks to help. If you think that’s gross, it might help to remember that if they didn’t eat it, it would still be around! Maggots are very important parts of our ecosystem, and help by cleaning it up.

Order Hymenoptera (Specifically Larvae of the Suborder Apocrita)
Insects in the suborder Apocrita include ants, bees, and wasps. There are lots of different families in this suborder, so you’ll probably need to do more research to figure out which bug you have. Looking at its surroundings will help, though. Does it live underground? In a nest with cells? Is the nest attached to a house or a tree? What other insects are around it? If you found the larvae of one of these insects, you’ll probably find adults nearby, since the larvae require the adults help to grow. See if you can catch an adult and use the Resources page to figure out what it is!
